Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricard Lobs. And today
I'm joined by returned guest, Doctor Joel Mars, he's
Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at the University of New
Haven and Bioethics Center scholar at Yale University. Uh
I'm also leaving a link to our first interview
where we talked a lot about moral and the
realism, desires and topics like that. And today we're
going to focus mostly on his book, The Spread
and other essays on moralism and Guilt. But we're
also going to talk more generally about moral realism
and anti realism desires and other related topics. So,
Doctor Marks, welcome back to the show. It's always
a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you, Ricardo. Very nice to be back with
you.
So let me start by asking you then also
because to try to contextualize the conversation here a
little bit and talking about moral realism and anti
realism. Where would you say morals stem from?
Well, I, I think there must be several answers
to that question. Uh FOR example, uh a biologist
of course, or a social biologist uh might uh
look for an evolutionary answer. A Darwinian answer, somehow
morality has served a purpose uh contributing to the
survival of our species or at the very least,
has not inhibited the survival of our species. Uh
I am not uh especially qualified to uh give
a biological answer. Uh I'm currently much more interested
uh in a and I guess I call it
a psychological answer, even though I'm a philosopher by
trade, I do have some background in psychology. That
is where my studies actually began. And uh for,
for probably all my career, even though I focused
mainly on ethics, there's always been a strong psychological
component of how I have done uh my ethical
philosophizing. So, uh to get right to your question,
uh My thinking is that desire is, is where
it starts. Uh Now I'm, I'm totally speculating here
uh informed by my studies, by my experience and
so forth and so forth. But uh my, my
strong hunch is that, uh it begins with all
human beings desiring, well, I might say that things
turn out well, even for the best, uh there's
a bit of question begging there because then I'd
have to say, well, what does that mean? What
does it mean for things to be for the
best and so forth? And ultimately, I would want
to give a psychological answer to that as well
in effect. I want to say we desire what
we desire. Um And, and not hold out for
there being some kind of objective good that we
desire, no, something becomes good because we desire it.
So perhaps the way I should put this is
to say that uh we have a hierarchy of
desires, obviously, some of our desires are stronger than
others. So when it comes to the, the things
that we desire most and here again, we, it
doesn't have to imply that we all have the
same desires. OK. Uh But whatever it is that
we desire most uh we desire with such strength
that we, we cannot tolerate the possibility that our
desires might not be satisfied. And so I think
that so by some kind of psychologic, which is
not really logical in some purer sense, are desiring
something so strongly induces in us a belief that
the world ought to be a certain way. In
other words, it ought to be the way we
want it to be. And that I think is
where morality begins, as soon as desiring something becomes
believing that it ought to be that way. I
think we introduce morality into the world. That's my
short,
that's fine. So, but getting more specifically into some
of the topics that you explore in your book,
the spread, what would you say are the roles
played by behaviors like blaming emotions, like guilt and
shame. What kind, what kind of roles do they
play in morality?
Well, see there's a whole uh bunch of concepts
which go together and starting with, I suppose morality
itself, the concept. All right. And, uh, and here
again, given the diversity of the world, the diversity
of human thinking desires and now beliefs, uh, there
will be many different concepts of morality. Uh, BUT
it does seem to be that well, at, at
least in my knowledge and my experience, uh, the
concept of morality will tend to bring along these
other concepts that you've mentioned. So, for example, if,
um, if you believe uh that things ought to
be a certain way, then if somebody uh does
something that goes against that, well, we might say
that they've done something wrong. And then if we
believe somebody has done something wrong, we might feel
that they uh deserve. There's another moral concept, blame
another moral concept. And if the person we believe
has done something wrong happens to be oneself, then
the self blaming is in effect guilt or the
feeling of guilt. So that's where they all come
in. And, you know, these are commonplace concepts, at
least in what should I say, Western society. Uh
You know, the societies that I'm most familiar with,
although I do have some knowledge of uh non
western philosophies, although I can't say that I have
much knowledge of, of uh non western societies, their
philosophies. I know something about the, the, the stuff
you get from book learning. Uh But I have
not lived in a non Western society and so
forth. But I would imagine, I would imagine you'll
find something similar, something analogous there as well.
Mhm. But then emotions like guilt and shame, I
mean, the way they play out psychologically they sort
of, uh, bring about, uh, a form of self
control. Right. I mean, people, they live in a
particular kind of society that is where certain particular
moral, moral values are dominant and then if they
go against those moral values or against the norms
that are prevalent in that society, then it's when
they might feel guilt or shame. So those emotions
uh serve a function of also self control or
not.
Uh Yeah. Yeah, I mean, that's exactly right. Uh
Again, here, here, I would be going into yet
another field, you know, the social sciences. Right. Again,
that, that's not my field, but certainly just uh
as a layperson. And also, of course, having read
some things in those other fields, I, I had
that sense that uh morality amounts to internalizing something
that certainly for most, if not all of us,
uh must come from the society in which we
grow up. Um uh So the society can, of
course, exert external forces upon us. Uh MOST obviously
and explicitly in the statutory laws, criminal laws and
so so forth. Um But uh yes, uh there
are subtler ways, you know, uh society helps to
constitute who we are, uh even as individuals, uh
uh starting with parents, I suppose. But ultimately the
entire society, the entire culture and certainly a huge
part of that would be internalizing a morality that
is somehow, uh you know, present uh all around
us and, and this may be a good place
for me to introduce another idea that um uh
I spoke of there being different concepts of morality.
One very basic kind of distinction. I think you
would find is between uh uh morality as what
I guess the sociologists would call ma uh whi
which, you know, again, with, with the notions of,
of right and wrong or, or proper behavior in
a given society. Uh But then there would be
something that is uh you might say more metaphysical
uh what I tend to speak of as objective,
right and wrong, objective, good and bad. Um And
these are uh things speaking, you know, in the
metaphysical sense now, metaphysical things, entities uh um that
I don't believe in, but I, but I think
that most people do believe and, and I think
what constitutes uh the, the sociologists, Maury uh or
what I sometimes call empirical morality would, would be
based on a belief in that metaphysical idea or
those metaphysical notions. So the belief of course, is
something real. It's a real psychological phenomenon uh that
somebody might have. But what they believe in would
be, you know, this seemingly meta metaphysical notion of
an objective, rightness and objective wrongness, et cetera.
And so, is that the same, I, I mean,
moral philosopher, moral philosophers themselves is that the way
they also think about objective moral values, are they,
when they use this expression, objective moral values, are
they also viewing moral values with some kind of,
uh, metaphysical reality to them and claiming that moral
values exist even independent of human minds or other
animal minds, for example.
Yeah. Well, well, that's the big issue. Uh, THERE
are certainly, uh, traditionally, I suppose, uh, it was
a straightforward metaphysical belief, a belief in something metaphysical.
Uh, ALTHOUGH I suppose some people might question that
as well, but that, I think that's a, a
common view but more recently, meaning in recent centuries,
uh uh, and certainly in the kind of western
philosophy and philo philosophical ethics, I'm acquainted with, uh,
not, not so, not necessarily theological ethics. That's, that's
again another whole other bag, right? But, but in,
in philosophical ethics, the trend has certainly been, um
to try to de metaphysical, uh the notions of
right and wrong, uh, good and bad. Uh And
here it gets very, very, very tricky, uh, because
I would say most philosophical ethics do want to
preserve the idea of a real morality. There really
are things that are right and wrong and good
and bad. Uh But since they're rejecting the metaphysical
view, you know, what's, what's gonna take its place
and, and, and so as I say, it becomes
very tricky and, and I think you find a
wide variety of attempts to secularize uh an objective,
right and wrong, good and bad. Uh I don't
particularly want to go through an inventory of, of
the various attempts that have been made. Uh But,
you know, to, to cut to the chase, uh
I myself and a handful of others uh in,
in modern philosophy again, meaning the last 100 or
more years. Uh PEOPLE even with like Nietzsche and
so forth. Um We, we have kind of rejected
the whole notion of, of an objective, right and
wrong and good and bad. I mean, that makes
it so much simpler, you know, we, we, we
don't have to come up with some elaborate, complex,
subtle. I mean, I mean, you know, they're really,
really have been good attempts. I mean, they're very,
they can be very persuasive and I can't say
that I myself completely reject all of them. Uh
I, I have an open mind. I'm a philosopher.
I, I can never really come to a final
conclusion about anything. All right. But, but by and
large, um I have become convinced uh that it
just makes a lot more sense. Uh It would
work out more to, I think the collective liking
of human beings if we had a world in
which we just didn't believe anymore in an object
of right and wrong and good and bad.
But then in terms of morality, if you reject
the idea of objective moral values, um I mean,
do you have a subjective approach to morality. Do
you use terms like that or not?
Well, again, uh uh that you'll find different points
of view about this as well. Uh Because even
among uh the philosophers who reject uh a, a
moral realism in, in terms of, well, wait, wait,
see again, everything is so complicated in philosophy because
every term can be debated. All right. So I
shouldn't even use the word real realism yet. OK,
let me, let me just go back to metaphysical.
Even those who would reject a metaphysical notion of
morality uh might still want to hold on to
the vocabulary of morality. Uh A lot of these
people call themselves uh fictional lists. So they would
hold on to a belief that they don't really
believe they would, it would be a pretend belief
so that they could continue to use the vocabulary
of morality. And their argument would be because it's
very useful. Um uh It obviously, again from an
evolutionary standpoint, believing in morality in a very strong
sense must have served a purpose. Uh But these
fictional lists would argue that well, now that those
of us who really think about this, don't, don't
believe in that hardcore kind of morality. Nonetheless, we,
we can still see the benefit in, in retaining
some of the gestures as it were of morality,
some of the psychological attitudes that go around with
morality. Um And, and it would just be too
dangerous and ultimately just wouldn't work out well for
the individual or society if we got rid of
the terminology. But, uh, then others of us like
myself, uh, who tend to go by the name
of, um, moral abolitionists as opposed to moral fictional
lists. Uh, WE feel it would be better even
to get rid of the terminology not to be,
uh, not to be a school mom about it.
Uh, AND say no, no, no, no, no, you
shouldn't do it, da da da da. Because if
we, if we say you shouldn't do that, we're
gonna be moralists again. Right? So we don't want
to go that far, but we do want to
encourage people to uh to go easy to go
light on the use of right, wrong, good, bad.
Uh And, and more recently, I myself in this
latest book that we're talking about, I even go
so far as to say, let's stop talking about
truth and falsity. I know you wanna ask me
about that later in the conversation, but I'll just
throw that in now but just talking about right
and wrong, good and bad now. Um Yeah, I,
I think it would be better. Uh And um
why, because I think if we continue to use
moral terminology, I think inevitably it's gonna bring along
with it, the attitudes, the metaphysical attitudes, it's, it's
just, you know, it's so ingrained in us that
if we really want to get rid of the
metaphysical attitudes, I think ultimately, we have to get
rid of the language as well.
So going back to perhaps the first question I
asked you when I asked you, um where moral
values stem from? I mean, there's another particular point
there that I would like to address because there
are some moral philosophers that I would imagine would
place themselves on the moral realist camp that uh
in reaction or in response to some scientific accounts
of morality and moral values. I mean, whether, whether
it is evolutionary approaches, soc social learning, anthropology, game
theory, behavior, economics or any of those approaches, they
say that uh we do not have a full
account of morality or where moral values stem from.
But uh I'm not claiming here that we already
have that full account through science or any of
these sciences. But if science would not account or,
or, or would not fully account for where moral
values stem from, then what would uh account for
it? I mean, because uh it's, it's hard for
me to understand people when they make that kind
of claim that science itself cannot fully explain where
moral values stem from.
What can I say? I mean, you know, there'll
be so many different responses to that. So some,
you know, are gonna just say, well, they came
from God, right, going back to the metaphysical notions.
Um AND I gave you my own psychological account,
you know, of, of where they could come from.
I, I would say one, I, I imagine that
uh and, and this is gonna overlap with some
of this, the more scientific versions you already alluded
to. I would imagine that uh playing the moral
card must give people or must make people think
it gives them a certain advantage. Uh For example,
when I, when I hear uh politicians uh use
morality, it strikes me that they're, they're just trying
to, to buttress their, their arguments, whatever they are.
So they'll say, you know, well, I am supporting
this policy or you should vote for me, you
know, because blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and then
they end it with and it's the right thing
to do, you know, I call it moral punctuation.
I'm probably repeating some things I said in our
first interview. But um it does seem to me
that people feel there's an advantage to doing it.
And I acknowledge that, I mean, uh I, if
I'm debating somebody who is very confident about their
position on whatever it is a practical matter, a
philosophical matter, whatever it is, um their confidence might
derive from their believing that morality is on their
side. Uh Especially if we're talking about some extreme
situation like something which in, you know, I, I
is, is, is, is atrocity a moral term. It
probably is. And there's certainly many times when I
view something which, you know, I am just naturally
gonna wanna label it an atrocity and then if,
if, II, I, if somebody then says to me
in a debate about morality and amorality, now, what
do you think about that? You know, wasn't that
an atrocity? Are you telling me it's not wrong?
The person who did that didn't do anything wrong?
Well, you know, I'm at an extreme rhetorical disadvantage.
Right. It sounds terrible for me to say no,
I don't think they did anything wrong. You know,
it, it's absurd. Right. It's absurd. Well, well, how
do I get around that? Uh, WELL, I mean,
theoretically how do I get around that? Theoretically I'm
going to say, yeah. But I really, you know,
I'm, I'm repelled by it. I'm iii, I really
don't want things like that. I, I, I'm very
motivated to try to prevent things like that and,
and discourage things like that from happening and I
would certainly want to stop somebody from doing something
like that, you know. So I would give all
these psychological answers, not moral answers. I would talk
about, um, what I feel. Um, AND I think
that's enough, uh, to, to, uh, to make, to
help make the world be the way I'd like
it to be. If everybody shared the feelings I
have, I certainly would, would think it would be
a better world as a result. It would just
be superfluous to add on top of that. Oh,
and by the way, it's the right thing to
do, you know? But as I say rhetorically, somebody
can use that right, wrong language to put an
Amoral list at a disadvantage.
So let me ask you this question that is
also sort of related to the previous one. So
let's say that someone is an atheist and they
go around condemning religious people for believing in things
that they think do not exist gods or some
other kind of divine entity. But at the same
time, they believe that moral values are objective. And
so they think that moral values are as real
and as far as the universe as atoms, for
example, and we can find them through whatever means.
Uh I mean, does that make sense? Does it
make sense sense to condemn someone for believing in
something gods in this case that uh an atheist
thinks does not, does not exist but then believing
uh also holding these sort of beliefs that sound
very similar to that. But in another camp, in
this case, morality,
well, you're giving me a leading question. I mean,
thank you. Of course, I, I think it's ridiculous
to, to uh to try to reconcile those uh
those beliefs and attitudes. Um And, and, and I,
you know, I think the so called new atheists
who aren't so new anymore. Uh And, and who
might, you know, certainly respect a great deal. I
mean, I'm certainly in sync with a lot of
their attitudes, but I think they just are mistaken
in this case. Um uh THEY are at cross
purposes. Uh uh And uh I would, I would,
you know, just as you suggested, I would s
say they, they still believe in a kind of
God uh that, that objective, right and r right
and wrong and good and evil or good and
bad um amount to believing in God uh to
think that uh you know, God's in His heaven
and all is right with the world And there
is somebody who will, who will make it all
right in the end and all that, that, that
relates to the desire I spoke to at the
beginning of our discussion today that we desire something
so strongly. It's not only a case that we
bring the ought into existence, the world ought to
be a certain way. But, you know, of course,
we bring God or Gods into existence, the ones
who are going to make it be the way
we want it to be and think it ought
to be or even tell us how it ought
to be and establish that. That is why it
ought to be that way just because the gods
think it ought to be that way or want
it to be that way. Uh Yeah, they're all
of a piece. It seems to me. So that's
why I coined the term hard atheism um uh
for an atheism that is thoroughly uh honest or
at least self-aware uh that is going to give
up. Not only an explicit God but the implicit
God of an objective morality. Mhm.
So, in our previous conversation we touched a little
bit on desires and today I would like to
get into more detail on that topic. So, first
of all, just to recap, would, would you like
to tell us again, uh, uh, what desires is
about?
Uh, SURE. Uh, I, if we, if we decide
to get rid of morality as it were, yeah.
I, I don't really like the term abolitionism either.
You know, because again, I'm not gonna abolish, right?
But that's the term that I inherited from whoever
coined it. All right. Uh, BUT if I, if
we get rid of, of, of morality, we don't
believe there's metaphysical, uh, morality and we just kind
of stop using the language and so forth and
so forth. Um, WELL, the, the people who don't
like amorality often say, well, you'd end up with
chaos or people, you know, raping and pillaging and
murdering and blah, blah, blah, the same kinds of
arguments that theists make a, about, about atheists. You
know, again, there's another parallel right there, you know.
Um, AND just as, you know, atheists think that's
ridiculous. You know, there are certainly lots of atheists
who are upstanding, wonderful compassionate individuals. Uh, JUST as
much as there are theists like that and we
certainly know many theists who aren't like that. Right.
So, you know, the same thing with moralism and
Amoral, you're gonna have some, you know, real stinkers
who are moralists and real thinkers who are am
moralists, no doubt. Uh, BUT in an attempt to
come up with a, a form of a morality,
uh, that will satisfy even a moralist who was
a very nice upstanding person. Uh, I wanted to
suggest some things, you know, I, I don't just
wanna say, get rid of morality. Right. I wanna
offer some kind of alternative. Uh, NOW getting rid
of morality is a big part of it. All
right. Uh, I, I do think that will help
to make the, the, the, the, the, the way
smoother. Uh, IT'S gonna get rid of a lot
of things that can cause unnecessary conflicts and so
forth. That that's a big argument that, uh, many
of the, uh, Amoral lists will make, will have,
will reduce the number of, of conflicts and the
intensity of conflicts in the world. But desir is
specifically, is the idea that, uh, we're left with,
um, what we want or what we like or
what we don't want or what we don't like.
You know, that's, that's pretty much the basis of
what will motivate us to do things or not
do things in lieu of, you know, thinking it's
right or wrong, good or bad. Uh, AND then
I add one more wrinkle to that. So, uh,
choosing the name Desir is might, I, I, it's,
it's not the happiest of names for what my
my view is, and th this is a constant
problem for any theory. You know, the name never
really fully captures what a theory is. Cause theories
tend to be rich entities. OK? But the other
wrinkle I'll throw in that I've thrown in is
that you want to rationalize your desires. Um And
now this, this raises a whole, this opens a
whole new can of worms. All right, because then
we have to talk about rationality, which I want
to do with you. Uh But that, that would
be the essence of desires, desires, says, instead of
trying to figure out what's the right or wrong
thing to do, ask yourself what is the rational
thing to desire or like that's it. That's rationalism
in a nutshell.
OK. But then we have to get a bit
deeper into that bit about rationality. So iiiii, I
mean, because I have to ask you at this
point, what does rationality mean in the context of
desires specifically
that that turned out to be the real, the
real kicker? Uh And I've been struggling with that
for the whole time. I've been thinking about desires
and immorality, which is how long now going on,
maybe 18 years or something since I had my
so called anti epiphany that morality doesn't exist. That
was a real shocker to me, a real shocker.
Um OK. Uh Again, morality, well, that's a favorite,
I mean, excuse me, rationality. And that, that's a
favorite concept. Of philosophers in particular. I mean, you
know, some would say precisely what distinguishes philosophy from,
well, religion is that it insists upon a strictly
rational approach to the big questions. Whereas theology not,
I shouldn't say religion, theology. Theo well, no, I
shouldn't say theology, I think is so complicated. Ricardo,
I'm sorry, this is, this is what happens when
you're a philosopher, you can hardly get one sentence
out before, you know, contradicting yourself. Uh How can
I just say calm down, Joel, calm down? Um
OK, there are many things that one can mean
by rationality. So when I first started using the
term, I meant what is pretty standard in philosophy
is that you, you think logically, you know, you,
you uh you vet we say you vet your
beliefs with logic. Uh And there are, there are
strict laws of logic, you know, even Aristotle came
up with a lot of them. Uh This goes
back a long way and uh I mean, my
God, he was such a genius to come up
with these things. Uh And, and, and they, you
know, many of them have stood the test of
time. Uh So you wanna think logically and you
know, we would also in a more modern sense,
say you wanna think in uh scientifically or we
wanna think in terms of um uh well, inductive
logic. Some people talk about uh uh things that
conform to um uh probability theory and scientific theories.
And all that kind of thing. So uh not
certainly we, we don't expect that you have to
um uh resolve everything deductively. Uh You can't, I
mean, nothing in the real world um in the
world of experience, even scientific laws, none of these
can be established deductively. Even scientists fully recognize that
now. Uh BUT nonetheless, there are standards um and
they are considered objective standards. OK? Of, of what
constitutes a rational belief or accordingly, uh an irrational
belief or a fallacious belief, which is another way
of speaking of something that's not strictly uh rational.
So that's what I had in mind originally when
I suggested that we uh vet or rationalize our
beliefs. But more recently, uh with my book on
uh uh ethics and reason or was it reason
and ethics? I think it was reason that I've
written so many books now, Reason and Ethics. Um
And then, and then the spread the, the most
recent and now I've got another one being considered
for publication in these more recent books. I'm taking
a more relaxed view of rationality because uh I,
I familiarized myself with um uh the objection to
a moralism that goes by the name of companions
in guilt, which argues it has many forms of
course. But one form is that rationality is just
as much uh a uh an, a, a um
um they might say a metaphysically based uh attitude
as morality can be. Um And I thought about
that and, and I became convinced that that was
true too. Uh, OH, look what I just said
that that was true too. I'm gonna have to
qualify that in a minute too. Uh, YEAH, because,
you know, where do we get this idea that,
um, you can only think in these terms, there
are these laws of inference, deductive or inductive, et
cetera, et cetera who says, you know, I mean,
yeah, they intuitively grab us at least some of
us, you know, those of us who think that
we're very logical, we say of course, just like
two plus two equals four, of course. But then
isn't it just like, well, you don't wanna go
around torturing babies, do you? Of course not, you
know, it's the same kind of intuition that comes
very naturally and that it seems absurd to deny,
but having become convinced that it can be denied
in the realm of morality, why should I be
so confident that it can't be denied in the
realm of rationality? And so finally, as I say,
I, I did become convinced that it can be
denied there as well. So what do I do
then? Do I become an a rationalist the way
I think of myself as an a moralist? Well,
yes, but now I'm gonna say something which has
become my, my ultimate meta, meta, meta philosophy of
life. Yes and no, you know, I speak now
of the philosophy of yes and no. Uh BECAUSE
I kind of think you can give a yes
AAA plausible, yes or no answer to every question.
So yes, I have now become an a rationalist.
But no, I can also give you a concept
of rationality which I can live with. Uh It's
a laid back concept as I think I said,
uh where all I mean by it is that
I'm asking you to reflect on your beliefs before
you act upon them. So, now a desir is,
is someone who, who reflects on their beliefs before
acting on them? It's that simple.
But then let me just ask you this question
more directly here. Are you against morality or just
against moralism?
Ah, good. Uh, BECAUSE in line with what I
had just said about how I can live with
a laid back sense of rationality, one might suppose
if I'm going to be consistent, which I like
to be because I like rationality. I like it.
Right. So, if I'm going to be consistent, then
why not have a laid back sense of morality?
Two, you know, and, and that I think is
what many of the, um, the, the non metaphysical
moralists have been attempting to develop all these for
the last couple of centuries, you know. Um, AND
as I said, well, I just found it simpler
to get rid of morality, you know, but, hey,
you know, arguments pro and con, all right. Uh,
AND, and, and and it's also important to note
that these are empirical questions. All right. I am
very much an empirical minded philosopher. And I recognize
that, you know, because these are empirical questions, I
cannot claim to have definitive answers. And that's not
only because I'm not a scientist in the formal
sense because I think that a non scientist can
be very empirical in their studies as well. I
think I am being very empirical when I'm in
my armchair doing philosophy because I'm thinking about daily
life, which is an empirical phenomenon. What would I
do? What would other people do? What do other
people I know do or say da, da, da,
da, da, that's an empirical study too. All right.
Mhm. Uh But even science recognizes, as I pointed
out when saying science doesn't look for deductive answers.
Even science recognizes that it's not necessarily now or
ever in possession of the absolute truth. So, in
that sense, you know, I'm open, very open to
the possibility that uh it, it might make more
sense in the end to live with a laid
back morality instead of having an out and out
amorality. OK. Uh But you had asked me about
moralism. So one way I can split the difference
here is to say, well, OK, I do still
want to get rid of morality for various reasons,
blah, blah, blah. Uh But let's, let's have this
conceptual distinction between morality and uh moralism. Um OH,
wait Excuse me? Iii I just, I just misspoke,
I just misspoke. I could say yes, let us
hold on to a laid back morality. OK. But
let, what we want to get rid of is
moralism. And in fact, we already have in, in
everyday speech in English. Uh You can tell me
if that's the case in, in some other languages.
Ricardo. Uh CAUSE I know you're probably a linguist.
Uh I'm not, uh but certainly in English, um
with the term moralism usually connotes something not so
nice. Uh You know, you're just getting carried away
with your morality there. Uh You know, relax a
little bit in other words, right? Uh And, and
it's also suggests a kind of arrogance, somebody who's
very uh moralistic in the sense of moralism as
opposed to moralistic in the sense of just moral.
Uh So, yeah, that, that's definitely something I've become
more open to after 18 years of being an,
a moralist. I, I'm a little more moderate now
in my Amoral. Is it, it can be, you
see the term itself, it can be an a
moralism instead of an a morality. I, I could
maybe live with that.
OK. But then in your work, one of the
things that you say we should try to do
is to abolish moral language. But if we were
able to do that, then how would we refer
to uh values that are then part of that
more laid back morality would we refer to them
as, I don't know, personal preferences or something like
that?
Yeah. Ok. Well, see, now, now we're, now we've
got two paths here. Ok. So if, if we're
gonna be laid back moralists, then we don't have
to get rid of the moral language, uh, necessarily,
or we can use it from time to time
as appropriate, you know. Uh, uh, SO I, but,
but we might also still choose and I kind
of, you know, I, I still have a preference
to be a AAA thorough going Amoral list, you
know. Uh So, so as I said, we have
two pairs. So, so one way I could answer
your question is to say, well, we don't have
to really change her language so much. OK. But
the other way I would answer it as a,
as a thoroughgoing Amoral list and perhaps I should
argue in those terms, you know, for most of
our discussion because, you know, that, that's, that's my
claim to fame. I'm an Amoral list and, and
I've, I've been considered really perhaps even the most
extreme one in, in philosophical circles recently. And I'm
kind of proud of that and I don't mind,
you know, even playing as it were a devil's
advocate. But, but, you know, I personally like it.
All right. So, so I'll, I'll, I'll go that
route. So how would I, what language would I
use to talk about something? Uh Which a moralist,
you know, would say is just bad, evil, atrocious,
horrible, outrageous da, da, da, da, da, da, da.
Well, you know, I think we have lots of
language for that. Um uh YOU know, another way
I could go by the way, you know, actually
this is a third path that occurs to me
now and your questions as always are spurring me
on to think, which is what the beauty of
philosophical dialogue, right? That, that's why, you know, the
best possible way to do philosophy is in a
dialogue because another person is gonna point out to
things you that you and your own little head
just didn't think of. All right. Yeah. So now
it occurs to me that it's really a third
path, the relativistic path because one thing I could
say is uh in a subjective this tone, I
could say, well, I think it's wrong, you know,
so instead of saying it's wrong, if I were
just speaking as either a hardcore moralist or even
a laid back moralist, you know, it's wrong. I
could be a relativistic moralist and say, well, I
think it's wrong, you know, I recognize that you
may consider it not wrong. See, I could go
that route or as a pure am moralist, I
could say, uh well, moderately I could say, I
don't like that, you know, in, in an aesthetic,
you know, if we're talking aesthetics, which I think
again is another realm just like morality where you
have the same kinds of issues I could say.
Well, you know, I, uh, Beet, well, Beethoven, I
love, you know, I love Beethoven. Uh, BUT, uh,
you know, oh, the Beatles aren't my cup of
tea actually. I love the Beatles too. But, yeah,
I, I could use like, and don't like, or,
you know, love the subjective, obviously subjective terms without
making an issue of it. Oh, Beethoven is the
best composer there ever was objective fact, you know,
in my objectivist mode, I sure think that, right.
But in my purely subjectivism and a and even
amorist mode, no, I can just say, um I
just, I love him every opportunity I have, you
know, I'm gonna go listen to Beethoven and I,
and I'd like to encourage you to listen, you
know, I know you don't care so much for
Beethoven now. But maybe if you, you know, listen
to this particular piece, you know, we could start
with that or, you know, or let me point
out some things about the, the melodic structure of
this piece that maybe you didn't pay attention to
before, you know, that, you know, so there are
all sorts of ways I can subjectively try to
convince people to come along to my way of
seeing things and remember one part of desires and
that I used to refer to as rational and,
and again, I could still do that in a,
in a, in an easy going way I could
still say, look, let me give you reasons because
the whole notion of rationality comes from the idea
of giving reasons, you know, having reasons for things.
I would still, I would always want to say,
uh, not just that. Oh, well, I like this
or I really hate that or I really don't
want you to do that. I could, I could
also give reason, like I say, and here's why,
right? That's to be rational. I want people to
reflect upon uh what they're doing or what they're
not doing, to encourage them to do something or
to discourage them from doing something right? In a
critical situation, of course, you know, call the building's
on fire. Well, of course, I want to say,
hey, because the building's on fire, let's get out
of here, right? You know, so even in a,
in a critical urgent situations, we give reasons, right?
So they're just about always appropriate. And so, so
what it wouldn't just be a case of substituting
the language of like, don't like, you know, want,
don't want and, and again, we have various gradations
of that obviously in, in English and other languages
uh for the language of right, wrong, good, bad.
No, it would also be involve giving reasons, giving
reasons uh AAA as part of uh explaining why
I have the likes and tastes that I do
and why I want you to have the, the
likes and dislikes and so forth that I want
you to have. Um Yeah, so there, there's a
lot more to it than just substituting one word
for another.
Mhm. So let's take one step further now because
we were still in the realm exclusively of morality.
But then last time I think you just alluded
very briefly to uh another thing that I would
like to ask you about. Now, what is Anna
lits or lit is? And I hope I'm pronouncing
the word correctly, but tell us about
it. Don't ask me. It's great today. That's a
pun folks. Um Yeah, II, I think other people
have used that term or maybe one person and
I don't know if they're using it the way
I did. I, you know, all philosophers use terms
in their own ways. But uh the lee, you
know, was the, the Greek uh river, the river
between the world and Hades the uh the above
ground and the below ground I think, let the
river of forgetfulness. So when you die, you know,
you forget everything and, and go to the underworld
for whatever purpose. Uh I hope I got that
right. My Greek mythology there. Um And so all
atheism is a philosophical term of art, uh which
is, you know, ah or an is a negation
prefix. So a lithium, Aletheia, Aletheia, just like a
morality, a rationality. Da da da. Aletheia would be
not forgetting, which is so Ali Aletheia would be
a theory of truth, you see forgetting somehow it's
become in, in p in philosophical lingo referring to
a theory of truth. So then I now wanna
deny truth that there is such a thing as
truth. And so I came up with the term
Anna atheism, the denial of the denial of forgetfulness.
And we could just shorten that because two negatives
are positive, right? Uh OR is m Morgenthau once
said, well, no, and that's a a jo I
won't bring in that joke. It's a tangent. But
um uh we can get rid of the two
negatives and just say lethe is for sure, you
know, getting back to forgetfulness here. So, so it's
just a fancy term, my fancy term for saying
that uh there's no such thing as truth. And
here again, we can go to different routes, right?
We can say, well, let's just be laid back
about it and say, you know, there's truth, but
we don't need it in any metaphysical sense or
we can be relativistic about it and say, well,
I believe this is true or I believe this
is false or we can go all out lethe
is about it and say there's no truth. Now,
how did I get around to, to that idea
which you know, is to some people just so
obviously self defeating. Because if I'm claiming that there
is no truth, am I not claiming that? That's
true? Yeah. Well, the way I get around it?
Is, is, is analogous to how I get around
using right and wrong and good and bad. And
because some people would make the same kind of
argument to a moral, a morality they'd say, oh,
are you saying it's wrong to be moralistic? You
know, and the way I got around that was
just to say, no, I'm just talking in terms
of what I like and don't like so analogously
or desire and don't desire. So analogously, I would
say, well, I'm gonna get around if I wanna
go hardcore, let theist, I'm just gonna go around
saying, well, I believe this and I don't believe
that that's all very simple. Well, some people would
say, hey, but you know, if you believe something
you believe it's true. I mean, that's, that's the
very concept of believing. And I say, well, that's
your analysis of belief. It's not mine. Philosophy is
fun. Philosophy can be pure wish fulfillment. Um But,
you know, I, I take these things very seriously.
Uh uh There's no problem in having fun with
the work you do, but it can have very
serious uh implications. And we did talk a lot
about those in our first interview. Uh And if
we have time, we'll do that this time too.
But, you know, I, I do mean this quite
seriously a a again, this relates to what I
had mentioned a little earlier about my answering every
question. Yes and no. Now that's another way of
saying, uh, you know, well, there's, you know, we
can have, this could be true, it could be
false. We can even say that about truth itself.
Yes. Every, there, there has to be such a
thing as truth. I know there doesn't have to
be such a thing as truth and belief you
have on and on and on and on and
on. You know, now will, will I ultimately trip
myself up? You know, I, if I, if I
really, really, really try to make this a completely
coherent uh theory that makes sense and actually relates
somehow or other to reality, am I ultimately gonna
be, you know, tripping on my own feet here?
I don't know, you know, time will tell. But
this is just another of those perennial issues which
is never gonna be resolved. That's, that's why there's
always gonna be philosophy because these issues will never
be resolved. So, so, you know, I stake my
position, you know, I defend my position. I take
it with somewhat of a grain of salt. But
I, I have to say, I'm, I'm very deeply
convinced of all these things. Now I'm, I probably
have veered from your question. Uh Yeah. Were you
asking me, how, how did I come about believing
this in the first place? This lethe is
uh no, actually that was the question I was
going to ask now. So
OK,
but, but, but do I, I mean, how did
you arrive at li is, uh uh, do you
see it, for example, as a continuation, just a
normal continuation from, uh, a moralism?
Yes. Yeah. And, and again, I think it came
from dealing with the companions in guilt objection. Uh,
IT'S, it's called companions and guilt. You know, just
because it's claiming that morality and rationality are equally
guilty. Uh So if you think morality is guilty
of something, you ought to think rationality is guilty
of something. And, and, you know, I told you,
my response was to, to seize the bull by
both horns and say, OK, yeah, uh they're both
guilty. So I'm giving up rationality too. If I'm
going the pure a rationality, amorality root. Um So
when I thought, you know, more and more about
giving up rationality in particular, it did seem to
me that rationality uh in its, in its pure
extreme metaphysical sense goes hand in hand with the
idea of their, of, of truth and falsity. Um
And so if you give up one, you kind
of give up the other. That, that was my
general thinking about it.
Mhm OK. So then let me ask you because
this is something that probably many people will be
wondering about. So, um when it comes to the
idea of abolishing morality or people becoming a moralists
in your estimation, do you think that it is
feasible for us as humans to do that?
That is the question that uh I've I've certainly
grappled with all along but that, that has central
place in the book I've just written, uh, which
has the tentative title, Ethical Health. Uh, AND the
subtitle is, uh, managing our moral impulses because, uh,
you know, I have tried to walk the talk.
Uh, I don't just wanna be philosophizing theoretically, as
I said, I'm a very empirically minded philosopher and
so I wanted to know if it was really
possible to become an aorist. Uh I'm not sure,
you know, and considering the people I know personally
or the people I know, you know, just via
reading or media or whatever, I'm not sure if
there are folks out there who would be full-fledged,
Amoral in the sense that I theorize about and
promote. I kind of think some are, I actually
toy with the idea that Jesus might have been
an am moralist. I mean, you know, who knows
what Jesus was actually like? Right. We all have
our favorite Jesus. Uh, BUT, you know, there are
many aspects of, of jesus' life as I know
about it through secondary tertiary et cetera. So sources,
um, that make me think that he might have
been uh an Amoral list. But anyway, I wanted
to see if I could become an Amoral list
and that's simply to test my theory. But because
I really thought it would make my life better.
Uh So I've been struggling to do that and
I've through the years I've had my ups and
downs both in terms of thinking that I was
able to be Amoral and in terms of whether
I thought it was making my life better to
be, to be this way. Uh, I can say
now after 18 years, I am more convinced than
ever that my personal experience bears out the possibility
of becoming a moral and that it makes things
more, I don't wanna say better to objective, more
to my liking. And I think the liking of
people who know me, who have to interact with
me. All right. Um And oh, by the way,
11 probable repercussion of this is how I've gotten
more laid back about morality as, as we've been
discussing, right? Because it does make me more laid
back, I think to become more, you know, tolerant
is a word we use. Uh And, but so
many would remark about me that I'm a very
emotional person. I would remark that about me. I
am a very emotional person. Uh I feel everything
very deeply. And so it has certainly been a,
a very great struggle for me to tone it
down. Uh BECAUSE, and, and that's why IE even
when I became an, a moralist, uh became a,
a AAA uh a very emotional, a moralist which,
which made me very liable to being moralistic, right?
Because moralists tend to be, well, I, I shouldn't
say that either. See, I have to, this is
why I'm qualifying everything. Right. No, moralists don't have
to be absolutely confident about everything. Only the, the
ones who embrace moralism. Right. But you can certainly
be a very reasonable, rational moralist who, who always
recognizes that, you know, they might be mistaken in
their moral convictions even though they feel them deeply.
Yes, of course, there are moralists like that too.
All right. So, I'm willing to grant all that.
I just wanna say now that I think an,
uh, an Amoral list has the potential to do
it even more effectively. Uh, DOES that answer your
question?
Mhm. Yeah. But, uh, let me just ask you
a follow up to that reps because of an
objection that some people might have to your, a
moralist position here. And this will also be my
last question for today. So, uh, I mean, some
people would probably object to you. I, in this
way, they would probably say that if people became
am moralists, then there would be a big risk
of them behaving in ways that we would consider
immoral all the time that is mistreating other people
and stuff like that. I mean, do you think
that there's any merit to that objection or
not? Of course, there is, uh, just as there's
merit to the theist objection that an atheist might
start raping and pillaging and murdering. But the question
for somebody in reality, in the empirical world of
experience that we know is, yes. But what are
the likelihoods, what are the tendencies? It's always a
matter of more and less in the real world.
Uh When, you know, anytime somebody institutes any policy,
even if you're a, a social scientist pro promoting
an economic policy, uh you know, social political policy,
whatever, obviously, some people are gonna get it wrong.
It's not gonna work for everybody because you're in,
you're always dealing with people who are totally diverse
in terms of their be police, their genes, their
cultures, their everything, or they might even have misheard
what you said or just so many ways things
can go wrong, excuse me, you know, go to
the way you weren't anticipating, right? See, I'm constantly
looking for different ways to say things now. Um
AND there are always ways to do it. Um
So yes, of course. But you know what's, what's
not logical or rational is to leap on those
exceptions of what you hope are exceptions. And so
you see, you see, you see, I mean, this
is what demagogues do. This is what a certain
presidential candidate in my country has been doing for
years. He takes one case where an immigrant may
have done something, you know, not guilty till proven
in a case of in, in, in a court
of law. And even then there's doubt, even then
there's doubt, right? But some immigrant, it looks like
some immigrant has done something, you know, that a
moral pers moralist would say is, is horrible. And
then I would say that's, I don't like that.
I don't want that to be done ever by
anybody. And that person needs to somehow, you know.
Um, YEAH. So he, he, he'll leap on one,
you know, awful case like that and say, you
see, we shouldn't allow any immigrants into the country
or illegal immigrants or, and even dramatically cut down
the percentage of, of a number of illegal immigrants
coming here legally. He even cut down. All right,
we don't want them, we don't want them. Yeah,
this is, I hate, I hate this. I really
don't like it. Right. Um So yeah, that's always,
there's no way to get around that if you're
dealing with somebody who's gonna to argue in that
way. Uh And, and rhetorically, they may get away
with it, you know, who knows? All right, all
I'm suggesting is the most that I think anybody
can ever suggest when they think they've come upon
something that might help to make the world more
the way we'd all like the world to be
is here are my reasons for thinking. So if
you agree, join the crowd, let's together, help, try
to change the world in this way and that's
it. I cannot promise you a rose garden.
Great. So the book that we've been focusing on
today is again, the spread and other essays on
moralism and guilt. Uh Just before we go, Doctor
Marks, would you like to tell people where they
can find your work on the internet and also
particularly about your upcoming book that you mentioned earlier.
Oh, thank you. Uh Well, you know, Amazon Place
to go or any place else. I don't know.
You know, you're, you're as good as I was
figuring out where my books can be purchased or
read and so forth. Also, of course, anybody is
always welcome to contact me by email for a
discussion. I love to talk uh to dialogue with,
with, with people. Uh And uh yeah, the book
that I hope will be the next one out
is um you know, as I, I said, I
think the title will be uh Ethical Health where
I'm really getting down to the real, real, real
nitty gritty on, on how to go about uh
transforming yourself uh into the sort of person. You
know, I've been talking about here, a so-called uh
Amorist. Um I, I'd also like to uh just
mention some names of other philosophers to you Ricardo
uh a and to our listeners, but people I'd
love for you to invite to your program if
you haven't already done. So it's hard for me
to believe that you haven't invited them since you've
invited everybody in the universe. It seems, but I
did a quick search on your site and I
didn't, I didn't find these names there. So if
your search function is working correctly, I don't think
you have them, but I would say uh uh
Martha Nussbaum uh Steven Morris, uh Ronnie de Sousa,
uh Lucia Schwarz, Eric Campbell, Steven Ingram Russell. Oh,
you've had Russell Blackford um uh Thomas uh Pelzer.
Uh THESE are marvelous people and you know why?
I think they're marvelous because they agree with a
lot of my idea. Uh But besides that, speaking
purely objectively, these are really wonderful, excellent philosophers. So
I hope someday to see them on your program
as well. Thank you again so much for inviting
me for another opportunity to talk about my thoughts,
of course. And thank you so much for the
suggestions and for coming on the show again, it's
always an immense pleasure to talk with you. Hi
guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until the
end. If you liked it, please share it. Leave
a like and hit the subscription button. The show
is brought to you by the N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Kel Matthew Whitten.
B are no wt ho Ealj con Phil for
con. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI Z
Mark Nevs calling Hol Brookfield, Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferus and H her meal
and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan
Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani
Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stassi Na
Me, Gary G Alman Sam of Zed YPJ Barboa,
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca,
Beto Lati Gilon Cortez Solis Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel
Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano
Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the Ausa
Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie
Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey, Junior, Old Ebon, Starry Michael
Bailey then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel, Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No
week. Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man George
Katis, Valentine Steinman Perras, Kate Von Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla.
Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks to
my producers is our web, Jim Frank Luca Stina,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller,
Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew lavender, Sergi Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie.
Thank you for all.